docs(e2e-testing): add comprehensive documentation for end-to-end testing (#11389)
owncloud/web: docs/testing/e2e-testing-standards.md

Reviewer: Please, also add metadata (e.g: https://github.com/owncloud/web/blob/master/docs/testing/testing.md)

Author: Done!

> End-to-end (e2e) tests are costly. Typically, they are expensive in terms of resources, take much effort to get going and are very sensitive to changes of any sort in the flow.Even small breaks anywhere along the line mean e2e tests cannot continue--they become brittle and nearly unmanageable over time.

Reviewer 2: if they are so bad, why do we then use them?

Reviewer: Better to write what benefits you can get from the UI e2e tests and the purpose of it

Author: Sorry for that. Modified now

In ownCloud, we use Playwright for webUI test automation. We benefit from lower barriers to entry, readability, and usability when test standards are consistent across repositories. For example:

- **Reusability:** Enhances reusability by making it easier to reuse functions, locators, shared steps, and other test code. Finding the necessary components and functionalities will be simple for someone working on a test resulting in reduced duplication and the requirement for rework after the initiation of a code review.

- **Facilitates reviews:** Code can be examined more quickly. Since you can quickly determine what the test code is doing, it eases the mental strain of code review.

- **Faster onboarding:** By following naming conventions, new contributors are onboarded more rapidly and feel comfortable enough to contribute to the codebase.

Here are the test standards and guidelines we adhere to when creating Playwright tests at ownCloud.

## Folder Structure:
- `tests/:`

>     - `e2e/`: Main folder containing all (end-to-end) E2E test-related files.

Reviewer 3: we use 2 technologies cucumber (BDD-tests) + playwright (test implementation). Can we separate them in the description?

like: 

structure: 
- e2e/cucumber - cucumber
- - features
- - steps - stepDefinition for ui steps and given steps (used api)
- - ....

- e2e/support - playwright
- - api
- - objects
- - .....

All assertions should be in your test, no assertion in the POM

DO 👍

```typescript
// POM file './pageOobjects/foo/'
// add all locators and functions related to the page. 
// allowing all tests to reuse 

import {expect, Locator, Page} from '@playwright/test';

export class FooPage {
    readonly errorMessage: Locator;

    constructor(page: Page) {
        this.page = page;
        this.errorMessage = page.locator('.error-message');
    }
}

// test file './steps/foo.ts'
import {FooPage} from './pageObjects/foo';

let fooPage: FooPage;

Then(
    'error message should be visible',
    async function ({page}) {
        const fooPage = new FooPage({page});
        await expect(fooPage.errorMessage).toBeVisible();
    }
)
```

DO NOT ⚔️
```typescript
// test file './steps/foo.ts'
// include locators directly in test
import { Locator, Page } from '@playwright/test';

Then(
    'error message should be visible',
    async function ({page}) {
        await expect(page.locator('.error-message')).toBeVisible();
    }
)
```

## Waiting:

We can avoid using any arbitrary waits until it is really, really necessary.

DO NOT ⚔️

```typescript
await page.waitForTimeout(5000)

> ```

Reviewer 3: we don't need set artificial waiting like `waitForTimeout(5000)` Playwright uses Auto-waiting.

t's a sentence from from playwright docs:
 Playwright waits for elements to be actionable prior to performing actions. It also has a rich set of introspection events. The combination of the two eliminates the need for artificial timeouts - the primary cause of flaky tests.

Reviewer 4: Note: this is a "DO NOT DO THIS" example - the line above has "DO NOT"

Reviewer 3: yes, I suggested to change line `We can avoid using any arbitrary waits until it is really, really necessary.` as `Playwright uses auto-waiting, so we avoid artificial waiting, the exception being if it is really necessary.`

> In ownCloud, we use Playwright for frontend test automations. We benefit from lower barriers to entry, readability, and usability when test standards are consistent across repositories. For example:

Reviewer: frontend can mean different things not only webUI
```suggestion
In ownCloud, we use Playwright for webUI test automation. We benefit from lower barriers to entry, readability, and usability when test standards are consistent across repositories. For example:
```

- **Reusability:** Enhances reusability by making it easier to reuse functions, locators, shared steps, and other test code. Finding the necessary components and functionalities is simple for someone working on a test resulting in reduced duplication and the requirement for rework after the initiation of a code review.

- **Facilitates reviews:** Code can be examined more quickly. Since you can quickly determine what the test code is doing, it eases the mental strain of code review.

> - **Faster onboarding:** By following name conventions, new hires are onboarded more rapidly and feel at ease enough to contribute to the codebase.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Faster onboarding:** By following name conventions, new contributors are onboarded more rapidly and feel at ease enough to contribute to the codebase.
```

Hopefully there are more contributors than just staff, contractors etc.

Here are the test standards and guidelines we adhere to when creating Playwright tests at ownCloud.

## Folder Structure:
- `tests/:`

>     - `e2e/`: Main folder containing all E2E test-related files.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    - `e2e/`: Main folder containing all end-to-end (E2E) test-related files.
```

Let's say what "E2E is the first time it is mentioned.

            - `<featureRelatedName>.ts`: Step definitions for each feature.

        - `utils/`: Utility functions and common helpers.

            - `helpers.ts`: Common utility functions (e.g., date formatting, data generation).

        - `config/`: Configuration files for Playwright and other tools.

            - `playwright.config.ts`: Playwright configuration.

        - `hooks/`: Cucumber hooks for setting up and tearing down test environments.

            - `hooks.ts`: Contains `Before`, `After`, and other lifecycle hooks.

        - `reports/`: Generated test reports (e.g., HTML, JSON).

        - `screenshots/`: Captured screenshots during test execution.

        - `videos/`: Recorded videos of test runs.

        - `test-data/`: Static test data files or files for upload.

            - `data.json`: Example JSON files or CSVs with test data.

## Test Structure - Arrange, Act, Assert:

We can follow the AAA (Arrange, Act, Assert) pattern when structuring the tests. In most cases, the Arrange step can be included in a Before block(hook).
Consider including comments defining each section to ease readability.

```typescript

> // arrange, create a let propert

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// arrange, create a property
```

What did you want to say here?
The comment could have more words to explain about `createProperty()`

await createProperty()

// act, raise a charge
// here we can call the method(s) defined in page objects too
await raiseCharge()

// assert, confirm charge has been raised
expect(charge).toBe('raised')
```

## Page Object Model (POM)

> Every page should possess one POM file to enhance maintainability and scalability of our tests. It should include all the selectors and functions which belong to corresponding POM.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Every page should possess one POM file to enhance maintainability and scalability of our tests. It should include all the selectors and functions which are needed to interact with the UI "page".
```

Maybe also explain somewhere what is considered to be a "page". It is not always just a full screen of the UI. It could be some logical part of the UI (dialog...?)

Author: I mentioned like this:
"with the UI page or component(s)"

All interactions should be done using the page objects, no selectors in your tests.

All assertions should be in your test, no assertion in the POM

DO 👍

```typescript
// POM file './pageOobjects/foo/'
// add all locators and functions related to the page. 
// allowing all tests to reuse 

import {expect, Locator, Page} from '@playwright/test';

export class FooPage {
    readonly errorMessage: Locator;

    constructor(page: Page) {
        this.page = page;
        this.errorMessage = page.locator('.error-message');
    }
}

// test file './steps/foo.ts'
import {FooPage} from './pageObjects/foo';

let fooPage: FooPage;

Then(
    'error message should be visible',
    async function ({page}) {
        const fooPage = new FooPage({page});
        await expect(fooPage.errorMessage).toBeVisible();
    }
)
```

DO NOT ⚔️
```typescript
// test file './steps/foo.ts'

> // include loctors directly in test

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
// include locators directly in test
```

import { Locator, Page } from '@playwright/test';

Then(
    'error message should be visible',
    async function ({page}) {
        await expect(page.locator('.error-message')).toBeVisible();
    }
)
```

## Waiting:

We can avoid using any arbitrary waits until it is really, really necessary.

DO NOT ⚔️

```typescript
await page.waitForTimeout(5000)
```

> This can cause flaky tests as we can rarely be certain the amount of wait time is enough. It can also unnecessarily increase the test run time . Instead, we can try:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This can cause flaky tests as we can rarely be certain the amount of wait time is enough. It can also unnecessarily increase the test run time. Instead, we can try:
```

```typescript
let isTurnedOn = false
```
### Page Objects / Classes

Declare in **_PascalCase_**.

Use descriptive naming, which can help the reader quickly identify what page or page component this is covering. Use as much context as needed from your product to make the name meaningful.

DO NOT ⚔️

```typescript
export class newModal
```

DO 👍

```typescript
export class AddWorksOrderModal
```

### Locators

Use descriptive naming, which can help the reader quickly identify what element the locator is targeting.

As an example, you can use a naming structure that contains ***“action / name of element” + “type of element”***.

***Defining type of element*** - These are your basic HTML element types, they’ll be defined and named in the design system, or as a team you can align on a consistent naming of the elements. Example: checkbox, tickbox, button, tooltip

***Defining action / name -*** Think about what action this element will perform when interacted with. Or any existing name/text of the element

DO 👍

```typescript
// This element is a submit button for the user registration form

> const submitButton = await page.locaor("<locator-path>");

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
const submitButton = await page.locator("<locator-path>");
```

```

DO 👍

```typescript
// This element is a button for uploading a profile picture

> const uploadProfilePictureButton = await page.locaor("<locator-path>");

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
const uploadProfilePictureButton = await page.locator("<locator-path>");
```

Here are the test standards and guidelines we adhere to when creating Playwright tests at ownCloud.

## Folder Structure:
- `tests/:`

    - `e2e/`: Main folder containing all (end-to-end) E2E test-related files.

        - `features/`: Contains Gherkin feature files.

            - `<specificFeatureFolder>/`: Collection house for "**related"** feature files.

                - `<individualFeatureFile>.feature`: Individual feature files.

        - `pageObjects/`: Contains the Page Object classes.

            - `<specificPageObjectFolder>/`: Collection house for related page objects for each webpage or component

                - `<individualPageObject>.ts`: Page Object for each webpage or component.

        - `steps/`: Holds the step definition files for mapping Gherkin steps to code.

            - `<featureRelatedName>.ts`: Step definitions for each feature.

        - `utils/`: Utility functions and common helpers.

            - `helpers.ts`: Common utility functions (e.g., date formatting, data generation).

        - `config/`: Configuration files for Playwright and other tools.

>             - `playwright.config.ts`: Playwright configuration.

Author: The config folder won't have only `cucumber/playwright configs`. This folder can contain other configs too.

>             - `playwright.config.ts`: Playwright configuration.

Reviewer: I have no specific preference :+1:

        - `hooks/`: Cucumber hooks for setting up and tearing down test environments.

            - `hooks.ts`: Contains `Before`, `After`, and other lifecycle hooks.

        - `reports/`: Generated test reports (e.g., HTML, JSON).

        - `screenshots/`: Captured screenshots during test execution.

>         - `videos/`: Recorded videos of test runs.

Reviewer: these should be gitignored. And how about:
```
reports/
|---- screenshots/
|---- videos/
```

Author: Are screenshots and videos part of a test report?

Reviewer 5: IMO screenshots and videos are generated for debugging purposes when tests fail. So in that sense maybe it do fall under test report

Reviewer 4: yes, it is all "test output" - screenshots, videos, text "log" of anything, test reports in whatever format.

DO NOT ⚔️

```typescript
await page.waitForTimeout(5000)
```

This can cause flaky tests as we can rarely be certain the amount of wait time is enough. It can also unnecessarily increase the test run time. Instead, we can try:

DO 👍

```typescript
await page.goto(fooBarURL, {
    waitUntil: 'domcontentloaded'
});
```

DO 👍

```typescript
const element = page.locator("some-locator-path");
element.waitFor({ visible: true });
```

DO 👍

```typescript
await fooPage.buttonFoo.click();
await expect(fooPage.titlePage).toBeVisible();
```

## Selectors

Avoid selectors tied to implementation and page structure.

Instead, we can prioritize the below, based on [testing-library guiding principles](https://testing-library.com/docs/queries/about/#priority)

- `getByRole` (this aids accessibility, reflects how users and assistive technology perceive the page)

- `getByText`

- `getByTestId` (add them when needed)

DO NOT ⚔️

```javascript
page.locator('.opt-u > div > .summary > div:nth-child(4) > div')
```

DO 👍

```javascript
page.locator('#foo-button');
page.getByText('OK');
```

## Naming Conventions

### Files and folders

Declare in **_camelCase_**

> 

Reviewer: I thought we are going to use `camelCase` for js/ts files and `kebab-case` for folders as web is using it already.

Author: Ok since we already the structure mentioned by you on `web`, let's go same for now. And let's get other developers view

In ownCloud, we use Playwright for webUI test automation. We benefit from lower barriers to entry, readability, and usability when test standards are consistent across repositories. For example:

- **Reusability:** Enhances reusability by making it easier to reuse functions, locators, shared steps, and other test code. Finding the necessary components and functionalities will be simple for someone working on a test resulting in reduced duplication and the requirement for rework after the initiation of a code review.

- **Facilitates reviews:** Code can be examined more quickly. Since you can quickly determine what the test code is doing, it eases the mental strain of code review.

- **Faster onboarding:** By following naming conventions, new contributors are onboarded more rapidly and feel comfortable enough to contribute to the codebase.

Here are the test standards and guidelines we adhere to when creating Playwright tests at ownCloud.

## Folder Structure:
- `tests/:`

    - `e2e/`: Main folder containing all (end-to-end) E2E test-related files.
    
      - `cucumber/`: Main folder containing all Cucumber(BDD) test-related files.

>         - `features/`: Contains Gherkin feature files.

Reviewer: hooks?

Author: Oh sorry, I didn't notice when I removed `hooks` part. Added now.

    
      - `cucumber/`: Main folder containing all Cucumber(BDD) test-related files.

        - `features/`: Contains Gherkin feature files.

            - `<test-suite-folder>/`: Collection house for "**related"** feature files.

                - `<aFeatureFile>.feature`: A feature file.

        - `steps/`: Holds the step definition files for mapping Gherkin steps to code.

            - `<stepDefinition>.ts`: Step definitions for each feature.

      - `support/`: Playwright (Test implementation)

        - `api/`: Contains API-related test files and configurations.
          
          - `<api-folder>/ `: Specific API tests for a particular service.

        - `objects/`: Contains the Page Object classes.

            - `<specific-page-object-folder>/`: Collection house for related page objects for each webpage or component.

                - `<individualPageObject>.ts`: Page Object for each webpage or component.

        - `utils/`: Utility functions and common helpers.

            - `helpers.ts`: Common utility functions (e.g., date formatting, data generation).

        - `config/`: Configuration files for Playwright and other tools.

>             - `playwright.config.ts`: Playwright configuration.

Reviewer: how about keeping `config/` directly inside `e2e/`

        - `hooks/`: Cucumber hooks for setting up and tearing down test environments.

>             - `hooks.ts`: Contains `Before`, `After`, and other lifecycle hooks.

Reviewer: this should go to `cucumber/` instead of `support/`

        - `reports/`: Generated test reports (e.g., HTML, JSON).

            - `screenshots/`: Captured screenshots during test execution.

>             - `videos/`: Recorded videos of test runs.

Reviewer: this should be directly inside `e2e/` directory

Author: OK and what about `test-data/filesForUpload`?

Author: OK and what about `test-data/filesForUpload`?

Reviewer: that should be fine there

---

> title: 'E2E Testing Standards'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: 'E2E Test Standards'
```
